The Philippine Coast Guard (PCG) said Sunday it is investigating whether the three vessels responsible for the Bataan oil spill are in the area because they were involved in oil smuggling or “paihi” with other vessels while at sea.
PCG National Capital Region (NCR)-Central Luzon spokesperson Lieutenant Commander Michael John Encina said that their investigating team is identifying the real reason why the sunken MT Terranova, the MTKR Jason Bradley and MV Mirola were in waters off Bataan before the incidents happened.
Under the “paihi” system, oil from a large vessel is transferred to smaller crafts at sea to avoid paying taxes.
“Ang mga ganitong reports ay hindi namin dini-discount. We are carefully coordinating din po sa other agencies para tulungan tayo sa previous citations ng mga barkong ito,” Encina said in a Super Radyo dzBB interview.
(We do not discount such reports. We are also carefully coordinating with other agencies to help us know what are the previous citations of these ships.)
“Sa ngayon, patuloy ang imbestigasyon na ginagawa ng aming team. Kapag may resulta na, ito naman po ay aming ipapakita at ilalahad para maging transparent tayo kung ano talaga ang naging dahilan nito,” he added.
(Right now, the investigation is still ongoing. Once there is a result, we will present it to the public so we can be transparent about what actually caused the incidents.)
Justice Undersecretary Raul Vasquez said Saturday that the Department of Justice (DOJ) is looking into a possible "conspiracy" that might have led to the recent maritime disaster in Bataan involving three vessels that leaked thousands of liters of fuel into Manila Bay.
On Friday, Justice Secretary Jesus Crispin Remulla said the DOJ is eyeing the filing of a class suit against those responsible for the oil spill.
Remulla also said that all three vessels were “interconnected,” but did not elaborate.
Amid the investigation of the PCG’s Marine Casualty Investigation Team, Encina said that they will ensure that those responsible for the oil spill will not be able to get away.
“Kagaya ng sinabi ni Secretary [Benhur] Abalos, kung sino ang may kasalanan, ‘yun ay mananagot,” he added.
(As Secretary Benhur Abalos said, those who are at fault will be held accountable.)
On July 25, the MT Terranova capsized and sank 3.6 nautical miles east off Lamao Point in Limay, Bataan, with one crew member reported to have died.
Meanwhile, the MTKR Jason Bradley — another vessel that sank in the waters off Mariveles, Bataan on July 27 — was carrying 5,500 liters of diesel, and was also found to have leaks.
A third vessel, the MV Mirola 1, meanwhile, ran aground near the shore of Mariveles town. Oil was seen flowing into the ocean from tanks inside the motor vessel.
Encina said that the companies of these vessels have been cooperating with authorities following the three separate incidents.
“Actually, patuloy ang kanilang pakikipag-ugnayan. Very cooperative ang mga owners sa mga ganyang measures, bagamat ‘yung kanilang logistical hindi siya spread katulad sa atin sa gobyerno,” he said.
(Actually, they are continuously coordinating with us. The owners are very cooperative in these measures, although their logistics are not as spread as ours in the government.) —KG, GMA Integrated News
