The oil spill seen to reach Manila Bay from the sunken MT Terra Nova tanker carrying over 1.4 million liters of fuel oil in Bataan may result in more than P351 million in damages to fishermen.
According to a "24 Oras" report by Mark Salazar on Tuesday, oil slick samples have already been collected at Tanza, Cavite.
The University of the Philippines Marine Science Institute estimated the leakage to reach Cavite shores by Monday and Metro Manila by Tuesday.
If left uncontrolled, the oil spill may affect over 46,000 fishermen in Central Luzon, Region 4A, and National Capital Region.
Despite this, some fishermen said they have not seen any signs of an oil spill.
“Kung meron yan [na oil spill], siguradong pati kami matataranta. Kawawa ang hanapbuhay namin niyan,” said fisherman Julius Rodriguez.
(If there was [an oil spill], we would be in panic. Our livelihood would be at stake)
“Sa ngayon dito, di pa naman po. Ayos pa naman ang bentahan [ng tahong] kasi malinaw naman ang dagat dito,” added fisherman Junnel Bin.
(As of now, not yet. The sales [of oysters] are still alright as the seas are still clear here)
The Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources has not implemented a fishing ban as leaking valves were immediately closed and the spill was contained.
In a virtual press conference by the Philippine Coast Guard on Tuesday afternoon, it was disclosed that oil siphoning in the area has been postponed as only 18 out of the 24 leaking valves of the MT Terra Nova had been sealed.
“Nasa local government units na ang pagpapasya kung magdedeklara sila [ng fishing ban]. Ang mandato po ngayon ng BFAR ay siguraduhin na patuloy ang assessment at evaluation patungkol dun sa kaligtasan sa pagkonsumo ng isda doon sa mga apektadong lugar,” said BFAR spokesperson Nazario Briguera.
(The local government units will decide if they will declare [a fishing ban]. The current mandate of the BFAR is to ensure continuous assessment and evaluation regarding the safety of fish consumption in affected areas)
Meanwhile, experts say that the oil spill had reportedly begun to affect marine life in Manila Bay.
“I can say dito, sa Manila Bay, meron pa rin siyang mga coral reef areas diyan sa may mouth [at sa] may Corregidor, Mariveles area, and meron na ring sightings na umabot na rin doon [ang spillage]. Hindi namin alam kung gaano kalala ang impact doon. Wala kasi kaming personnel on the ground eh, so it's the Coast Guard and BFAR and DENR doing the ground assessment,” said Dr. Cesar Villanoy of the UP-MSI.
(I can say that here, at the Manila Bay, there are still coral reef areas at the mouth [and at] Corregidor, Mariveles area, and there are also sightings that [the spillage] has reached there. We still don’t know how bad the impact is there. We don’t have any personnel on the ground, so it’s the Coast Guard and BFAR and DENR doing the ground assessment)
BFAR added that while the oil spill is under control, a clean-up operation would have to be conducted for the affected nearby shores.
“Kapag magiging bahagi tayo ng clean-up, dapat may protective equipment po tayo. Wag po basta basta magkakaroon ng contact dun sa oil slick kasi yung amoy nito, lalo na dun sa mga asthmatic, pwedeng makaapekto,” said Briguera.
(If you will be part of the clean-up, you should have protective equipment. Do not have contact with the oil slick because the smell can affect you, especially the asthmatic) —Jiselle Anne Casucian/LDF, GMA Integrated News
