
MANILA, Philippines — Cavite Gov. Jonvic Remulla has assured the province’s residents affected by the oil spill from fuel tanker MT Terranova that sank off Bataan that they will receive proper compensation, its amount estimated to reach more than P12 million.
“They (MT Terranova management) assured us that 31,000 fisherfolk will be compensated in due time after the validation of the damage,” Remulla told reporters after he met with Terranova’s representatives at the governor’s office on Tuesday morning.
READ: Cavite gov’t readies suit vs sunken tanker owner
The provincial government was following the standard procedure for filing the insurance claims,” Remulla explained in the video of the interview that was posted on social media by Cavite-based journalists.
When asked how much the estimated cost was, Remulla replied: “P12 million for the last 12 days and running.”
The governor said they were estimating a compensation of P350 a day multiplied by the number of days that the fisherfolk, market vendors and shellfish cage caretakers will be displaced.
“We are well documented on who was affected in Cavite,” he added.
In a separate brief radio interview, Remulla emphasized what transpired during the meeting.
“Wala kaming aregluhan, wala kaming usapan. Kung merong pananagutang kriminal sa nangyari sa Terranova ay mananagot sila (There was no settlement, we didn’t talk about that. If there is criminal liability in what happened with Terranova, they will be held accountable),” he said.
MT Terranova, owned by Shogun Ships Co. Inc. sank in the waters off Limay town in Bataan on July 25, with 1.4 million liters of industrial fuel on board, during the onslaught of Supertyphoon Carina (international name: Gaemi).
The vessel was chartered to carry the fuel from Limay to Iloilo City by SL Harbor Bulk Terminal Corp., a subsidiary of San Miguel Corp., the largest conglomerate in the country.
The Philippine Coast Guard has reported that the oil that leaked from the tanker has spread across the waters off provinces surrounding Manila Bay, including Cavite, adding that it has been working round the clock to contain the spill.
However, during the media interview, Remulla reported that the oil sheen in the coastal areas of Cavite has started to disappear.
On Saturday, Remulla announced they would file criminal charges against the Terranova owner for the affected residents to claim damages for what happened to the coastal areas in Cavite.
Remulla on Tuesday explained that the filing of cases would depend on the findings of the Department of Justice.
He said they have yet to file the complaints.
“Because the process has just begun. But we are cooperating, and we are in touch,” Remulla said.
Justice Secretary Jesus Crispin Remulla recently announced that a class suit was being eyed against those responsible for the three recent maritime mishaps in Bataan.
He said the authorities were looking into the angle of the criminal cases against the owners, and others who may be responsible for maritime tragedies.
After the sinking of Terranova, another tanker, the MTKR Jason Bradley, also capsized due to bad weather in the waters off Bataan on July 27.
Four days later, another vessel, the MV Mirola 1, which was carrying diesel oil, ran aground in shallow waters off the coast of Bataan’s Mariveles town, causing the ship to tip over.
The Cavite provincial government on Wednesday declared a state of calamity in the cities of Cavite and Bacoor, and the towns of Noveleta, Rosario, Kawit, Tanza, Naic, Maragondon and Ternate affected by Terranova’s oil spill.
Subscribe to our daily newsletter
By providing an email address. I agree to the Terms of Use and acknowledge that I have read the Privacy Policy.
Remulla also prohibited the catching and selling of all marine products from the affected areas.
Some 352,179 residents in the coastal barangays of Cavite were affected by the oil spill, according to the Regional Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council in Calabarzon (Cavite, Laguna, Batangas, Rizal and Quezon). INQ
