OIL SPILL composite image from Inquirer/PDI file photos

OIL SPILL composite image from Inquirer/PDI file photos
MANILA, Philippines—As the oil spill from three sunken vessels — MT Terranova, MTKR Jason Bradley, and MV Mirola 1 — spreads across a significant portion of Manila Bay, contaminating the waters of Cavite, Bulacan, and Bataan, authorities are issuing urgent warnings about the severe health risks posed by exposure to this environmental disaster.
While the government, environmental organizations, and health authorities intensify their efforts to manage the escalating crisis, the public is strongly urged to take preventive measures.
An international ocean protection and conservation group further warned about how the toxic spill continues to pose a grave threat to the environment and the health and livelihood of communities in affected areas.
The series of maritime disasters began on July 25, 2024, when MT Terra Nova, a tanker carrying 1.4 million liters of industrial fuel oil, capsized off the coast of Limay, Bataan. The vessel, en route to Iloilo, sank while Typhoon Carina (Gaemi) ravaged Metro Manila and surrounding provinces.
READ: 1 dead, oil spill feared after tanker capsized in Bataan waters
Just two days later, on July 27, 2024, the MTKR Jason Bradley, which was anchored in the waters off Bataan, sank nine meters deep near Barangay Cabcaben in Mariveles — approximately 600 yards from the shore.
The vessel was carrying 5,500 liters of diesel when it sank during the onslaught of Super Typhoon Carina. Initially, the shipping company claimed that there was no fuel cargo onboard.
READ: Another fuel tanker sinks in Manila Bay
The latest incident occurred on July 31, 2024, when the MV Mirola 1 ran aground in shallow waters off the coast of Sitio Quiapo, Barangay Biaan — also in Mariveles — causing the ship to tip over.
GRAPHIC: Ed Lustan / INQUIRER.net
According to Karagatan Patrol, an online platform created by the renowned marine conservation organization Oceana, it is estimated that the oil spill from the sunken vessels affects 50 percent of Manila Bay, with the pollution spreading to Cavite, Bulacan, and Bataan.
Manila Bay serves as a crucial spawning ground for fish like sardines, a key source of protein for millions of Filipinos.
Oceana warned that the oil spill threatens to smother and kill vital mangroves, coral reefs, and seagrass beds in the bay, which are essential for the breeding and feeding of marine species.
The bay also provides habitat for at least 60 migratory bird species, including 12 threatened ones, just as their migration season begins.
“The destruction of these habitats leads to long-term ecological damage for years to come and puts the coastal nation at further risk from increasing storms,” Oceana said.
The Philippine Coast Guard (PCG) began recovery operations for the MV Mirola 1 on August 1. Photos shared on the PCG’s official Facebook page showed personnel manually collecting the oil inside the vessel.
The PCG said the collected oil was carefully placed into large drums, which were then prepared for transport to a waste disposal facility to prevent any potential health hazards to local residents.
READ: PCG aims to finish oil recovery from MV Mirola 1 on Thursday
Additionally, on August 7, the PCG took part in a simulation exercise at Lamao Port in Limay, Bataan. This drill was described as a crucial part of the ongoing siphoning operation for the MTKR Terranova.
“We learned that heavy fuel oil flows when siphoned and confirmed the necessity of hot tapping each tank to prevent water mixing,” said Harbor Star Shipping Services Inc., the salvor contracted for the cleanup.
“This process is time-consuming due to water depth and divers’ 25-minute limits. With these insights, we can establish a timeline by Friday,”it said.
Oceana has reported that traces of oil have already been detected in fishing villages in the provinces of Bulacan and Cavite. In Cavite, the Ternate Marine Park, a popular beach destination and a nesting ground for sea turtles, is also feared to be affected by the spill.
GRAPHIC: Ed Lustan / INQUIRER.net
Eight towns in Cavite—Bacoor, Kawit, Noveleta, Rosario, Tanza, Naic, Maragondon, and Ternate— have already declared a “state of calamity.”
Under the Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act, a state of calamity is defined as “a condition involving mass casualty and/or major damages to property, disruption of means of livelihoods, roads and normal way of life of people in the affected areas as a result of the occurrence of natural or human-induced hazard.”
The Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources (BFAR) has issued a warning to the public to avoid consuming fish caught in areas impacted by the oil spill in Bataan province, as these fish are deemed unsafe for human consumption.
“[T]he Bureau maintains that as a precautionary measure, fish harvested from areas where oil slicks are observed be deemed unsafe for human consumption. This is to avoid incidents of food poisoning as a result of ingesting contaminated seafood,” BFAR said in a bulletin.
BFAR stated that it is carrying out continuous fish sample tests in the affected areas of Central Luzon, Calabarzon (Cavite, Laguna, Batangas, Rizal, and Quezon), and the National Capital Region (NCR) to determine if fish and other seafood are contaminated.
Results from a sensory evaluation showed fish samples collected from the towns of Noveleta and Rosario in Cavite province have “some degree of tainting with petrochemicals, albeit before any oil slicks were noticed in the area.”
Fish samples gathered from Cavite City as well as the towns of Tanza and Naic remain free from petrochemical contamination.
READ: BFAR: Don’t eat fish from oil spill areas
In a radio interview last July 30, PCG spokesperson Rear Admiral Armand Balilo said fishing in areas affected by the oil spill in Manila Bay is not advisable
READ: Coast Guard : Fishing in Manila Bay unsafe due to oil spill
A no-catch and no-sell zone for all shellfish has also been issued in the province of Cavite.
In addition to the BFAR’s warning, the Department of Health (DOH) emphasized the immediate health risks associated with consuming contaminated water or seafood, including symptoms such as vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, coughing, irritability, and unconsciousness.
The DOH also warned that ingesting large quantities of contaminated water or seafood could lead to more severe outcomes, such as convulsions, coma, or even death.
Oil spills pose a significant threat to public health, not only through ingestion but also via other forms of exposure. The immediate symptoms associated with these exposures include:
Individuals experiencing any of these symptoms due to exposure to the oil spill are urged to seek immediate medical attention at the nearest health facility or consult a health care professional.
The DOH has issued comprehensive guidelines for residents living in or near areas impacted by the oil spill, detailing both recommended actions and essential precautions.
According to the DOH, the following measures should be observed:
The DOH also provided specific instructions for responders, volunteers, and cleanup workers, highlighting the importance of the following:

GRAPHIC: Ed Lustan / INQUIRER.net
Additionally, the health department asked the public to avoid the following:
“While oil spills are rare, they can cause extensive damage to marine life and pose significant health risks to those exposed,” the DOH warned.
BFAR has estimated that the oil spill will devastate the livelihood of tens of thousands of fishers in Bataan, Bulacan, Pampanga, and Cavite, with projected monthly revenue losses of up to P83.8 million in Bataan alone and more than P70 million in Bulacan and Pampanga.
READ: Fishermen struggle as Bataan oil spill disrupts livelihoods
Data from the Department of Agriculture (DA) further detailed that 28,373 fishers and 5,810 boats have been hit with an estimated forgone income of P78.69 million over eight days since the fishing ban was imposed on July 30, 2024.

GRAPHIC: Ed Lustan / INQUIRER.net
The Pambansang Lakas ng Kilusang Mamamalakaya ng Pilipinas (Pamalakaya), a progressive fisherfolk organization, criticized the “indefinite fishing ban” imposed on nine coastal towns in Cavite, arguing that the ban is more harmful to fishers’ livelihood than the oil spill itself.
READ: Bataan fishers still waiting for assistance
“The government’s response to the oil spill has done more harm to the fishers’ livelihoods than the spill itself. While Cavite is under a fishing ban, the fishers are not receiving any regular support,” Ronnel Arambulo, vice chairperson of Pamalakaya, said in Filipino.
“We are calling for the lifting of the fishing ban because the oil is no longer directly affecting the fishing grounds of the province,” Arambulo added.
“Toxic oil spills in our oceans are like fires in our forests, leaving a path of destruction that brings decades of negative impacts,” Gloria Estenzo Ramos, Oceana’s vice president in the Philippines, said in a statement.
Ramos added that oil spills are “a deathtrap for marine ecosystems” and have detrimental effects on people, wildlife, and the environment.
She warned that if more than one million liters of oil onboard one of the sunken vessels is not safely removed, the resulting spill could have devastating effects, potentially killing marine wildlife, destroying mangroves, and endangering people’s health, food supply, and livelihood.
Subscribe to our daily newsletter
By providing an email address. I agree to the Terms of Use and acknowledge that I have read the Privacy Policy.
“We know what’s at stake here: jobs, food, exports, and even lives. Even after the oil pollution is cleaned up, seafood may be contaminated for years,” she said.
Ramos also underscored the long-term impact on the country, stating: “[t]he people of the Philippines will be dealing with the impacts of this devastation long after the headlines fade, and the government must do everything it can to mitigate this disaster as quickly as possible.”
RELATED STORIES:
PH oil spills: What history and data tell
Damage, impact of oil spills in PH
Sunken ship owner must also pay for maritime pollution, says green group
