Following the sinking of two tankers off the coast of Bataan last week, the Department of Health (DOH) has warned the public against the health impacts of oil spill to humans, may it be through inhalation, physical contact, or ingestion. 
In an advisory, the DOH emphasized that oil spill may cause the following health effects depending on how an individual came in contact with the substance: 
To avoid these, the DOH advised that warning signs be put up in affected areas or near affected bodies of water. The public should also ensure that their drinking water and food are clean.
Children should also be prohibited from affected areas, as they usually play on the ground and are at higher risk of ingestion since they frequently put their hands in their mouths.
The DOH said when exposed to the oil spill or any chemical from the oil spill, the clothes should be removed and decontaminated. Exposed areas of the body should also be immediately washed with mild soap and water.
Those experiencing any symptoms from exposure to oil spill are urged to seek immediate medical assistance from the nearest health facility and healthcare professional. 
The DOH also reminded the public not to bathe, wash clothes, or wade in oil spill affected areas to avoid exposure to the oil and any chemicals used to control the spill. 
Even pets and farm animals should be barred from bathing or drinking from the affected water. 
The agency also asked the public not to eat seafood like fish and shellfish from affected areas and nearby water sources unless cleared by local authorities.
On July 25, the MT Terranova capsized and sank 3.6 nautical miles east off Lamao Point in Limay, Bataan, with one crew member reported to have died.
The Philippine Coast Guard (PCG) confirmed leaks from the tanks carrying 1.4 million liters of industrial fuel oil onboard the motor tanker.
Meanwhile, the MTKR Jason Bradley — another vessel that sank in the waters off Mariveles, Bataan on July 27 — was carrying 5,500 liters of diesel, and was also found to have leaks. —Giselle Ombay/KBK, GMA Integrated News  
