Environmental groups on Thursday called on the government to act immediately to deal with the oil spill in Bataan from a capsized motor tanker. 
Marine protection organization Oceana raised the alarm on the spill's harmful impact on the municipal waters of Limay and Mariveles in Bataan, and Tanza, Rosario, Noveleta, and Cavite City in Cavite. 
“The government should  immediately assess the effects of the oil spill on the marine environment, including fisheries, ensure that procedures and standards are set in motion and  investigate who are directly responsible for this maritime incident,” said Oceana vice president Estenzo Ramos in a statement. 
“Further, we need to make sure that laws are strictly enforced and  appropriate penalties are implemented,” she added. “Learning from the lessons of the oil spill in the Verde Island Passage, we need to study and craft measures such as  increasing the fines and other sanctions  based on the damages caused on the habitats, wildlife  and the people’s lives and livelihood.” 
One died after MT Terra Nova, which was en route to Iloilo from Bataan, capsized 3.6 nautical miles east off Lamao Point in Limay town around 1:10 a.m.
An oil spill was also monitored 5.6 nautical miles east off Lamao Point with an estimated coverage of two nautical miles, carried by a strong current heading east to northeast. 
Meanwhile, Greenpeace urged the government to  lessen its dependence on fossil fuels as the oil spill is like a “ticking time bomb” to the safety and livelihoods of those living in coastal areas. 
“We reiterate our call for the Marcos administration to end our dependence on fossil fuels, and expedite a just transition to renewable energy,” said Greenpeace in a statement. 
“President Marcos must also call for payment from fossil fuel companies for losses and damages suffered by Filipino communities, and immediately adopt a comprehensive Climate Justice Agenda as the country faces the worsening impacts of the climate crisis.” 
According to the Philippine Coast Guard, Oil Spill Response Organizations, oil companies, and local government units offered to extend help in oil spill response efforts. 
The last major oil spill incident in the Philippines was just in February 2023 when the MT Princess Empress, which was carrying 900,000 liters of industrial oil, sank off the coast of Naujan, Oriental Mindoro. 
The oil spill recovery operations were finished in June of the same year. — Vince Angelo Ferreras/BM, GMA Integrated News
 
