One person died after a motor tanker capsized and caused an oil spill in Bataan early Thursday, according to the Philippine Coast Guard (PCG).
A 24 Oras report by Raffy Tima on Thursday later reported that the missing individual was found dead by a PCG search team.
In a statement, PCG spokesperson Rear Admiral Armand Balilo said the incident involving MT Terra Nova happened 3.6 nautical miles east off Lamao Point in Limay town around 1:10 a.m.
PCG Rear Admiral Balilo said 16 of the 17 crew on board have been rescued. Four of the 16 rescued individuals are already receiving further medical attention. 
MT Terra Nova, which was heading to Iloilo, was carrying 1.4 million liters of industrial fuel.
“The deployed aerial asset monitors an oil spill 5.6 nautical miles east off Lamao Point with an estimated coverage (length) of two nautical miles carried by strong current heading east to northeast. Marine environmental protection personnel have also been mobilized to combat the oil spill,” PCG said.
 
An oil spill was observed after motor tanker Terra Nova capsized and submerged off Bataan waters early Thursday morning, the Philippine Coast Guard said. MT Terra Nova, heading to Iloilo, was carrying 1.4 million liters of industrial fuel. One crew member is missing. @gmanews pic.twitter.com/llgJYOFYGv
Bataan Governor Jose Garcia claimed the ship will be easily located as it sank in a shallow part of the Manila Bay.“Ang lalim na ating Manila Bay ay 30 meters so hindi imposible na magawan ng paraan para safely, securely mailabas yung laman ng tanker na langis para hindi makaapekto sa ating kapaligiran,” said Garcia in a Saksi report by Raffy Tima on Thursday.(The depth of Manila Bay is 30 meters so it’s not impossible to find a way to safely, securely retrieve the oil contained inside the tanker so that it would not affect the environment)Meanwhile, President Ferdinand Marcos Jr. urged concerned agencies to assist and analyze the extent of the impact of the oil spill.“Basically, what we need to assess is where was the capsized vessel? The fuel is being released, what are the tides? What are the winds? Where is it headed? Para maunahan na natin. [The Department of Science and Technology] can also make some determinations of that,” he said.Department of Environment and Natural Resources Secretary Maria Antonia Yulo-Loyzaga also said that they will place a monitoring instrument as soon as the vessel has been located.“Kailangan pong malaman kung saan siya ngayon at kung ano ang estado ng istruktura ng barko and then andito kami para tumulong,” she said.(We just need to know where it is and what is the state of the structure of the vessel, and we are here to help) 
Oil trace
According to Balilo, the oil that was traced was probably the working fuel of the motor tanker and not part of the 1.4 million liters of industrial fuel stored in it.
“Probably ito yung fuel na ginagamit ng barko. Yung karga, wala pang signs na tumatagas na,” he told reporters in a virtual interview.
(This was probably the working fuel used of the ship. There are no signs that the industrial oil on storage is leaking yet.)
“Yun ang magiging goal natin na malaman kung tatagas based doon sa plan ng barko. Malalaman natin kung gaano ka-secure yung water integrity ng mga tanks niya,” he added.
(That will be our goal, to know if there will be a leak based on the ship's plan. We will know secure the tank is.)
The PCG said that "there was no weather disturbance in the vicinity waters when the maritime incident occurred."
PCG’s BRP Melchora Aquino launched search and rescue operations for the one missing crew.
“PCG Commandant, CG Admiral Ronnie Gil L Gavan, has ordered the conduct of an investigation regarding the maritime incident,” the PCG said.
The PCG is now coordinating with oil spill response organizations to help contain the spill.
The agency aims to retrieve the remaining oil inside the tanker in a span of seven days.
Huge waves
Balilo said that based on the initial account of rescued crew members huge waves hit and filled the motor tanker. 
“Umalis sila doon sa Bataan papunta ng Iloilo. Pero during that time bandang mga alas 10 ng gabi, naramdaman na nila na malakas na yung alon,” he told reporters.
(They departed Bataan for Iloilo. But  around 10 o'clock in the evening, they felt that the waves were getting stronger.)
“Nag-decide yung kapitan na bumalik pero initially nahirapan sila sapagkat ang sabi nila pasalubong sila doon sa alon. Ang term ng mga crew ay sumalok sila ng alon at pinasok yung barko hanggang tuluyan silang nag-capsize,” he added.
(The captain decided to go back but initially they had difficulty because they said they were going against the direction of the waves. The crew said their ship began taking in water until it capsized.)—VAL/RF, GMA Integrated News
 
