The oil spill from sunken motor tanker Terranova in Bataan may reach the coasts of Bulacan and Cavite, the University of the Philippines Marine Science Institute (UP MSI) said.
In a bulletin issued on Sunday evening, the UP MSI said its forecast, with the help of concerned government agencies, was based on the weather patterns and conditions including wind direction.
“The model shows possible transport northwards to Bulacan confirmed by oil slick sightings, from the slick observed on July 26, 2024 5:40AM by [the Philippine Space Agency],” the UP MSI said.
“Considering the continuous release of oil from the tanker, coastal areas of Cavite City may also be affected with the eastward change of forecasted winds today, July 28, 2024,” it added.
However, the UP MSI noted that models should be used with caution as they have some levels of uncertainty due to assumptions and limitations.
The UP MSI said models are produced to inform the public on the potential direction of the oil spill and help direct response measures on the ground.
The Philippine Space Agency (PhilSA) released a map on Friday showing the potential size of the oil spill from the sunken tanker off the coast of Bataan.
It includes the tanker's location as well as a satellite image of the oil leak that was taken at 5:40 a.m., PhilSA said, adding that the slick covers an area of 14.4 square kilometers.
President Ferdinand Marcos Jr. on Saturday conducted an aerial inspection of the oil spill from the sunken MT Terranova and ordered the creation of an inter-agency task force that would address the matter.
On July 25, one crew member died and 16 others were rescued after MT Terranova capsized and sank 3.6 nautical miles east off Lamao Point in Limay town, the Philippine Coast Guard (PCG) said.
The PCG on Sunday confirmed that there were leaks from the tanks carrying 1.4 million liters of industrial fuel oil onboard the motor tanker.
According to the PCG, the nine affected tank valves have been sealed and their personnel continue to monitor the situation.
Aside from MT Terranova, another sunken ship, the MTKR Jason Bradley, carrying “diesel cargo” of an unknown quantity was found to have leaks in Bataan. —Joviland Rita/KG, GMA Integrated News
