The estimated cost of damage from the Bataan oil spill in Cavite has reached P1 billion.
According to a ''24 Oras Weekend'' report by Bernadette Reyes on Saturday, fish stalls in Noveleta, Cavite, have closed down due to the impact of the oil spill.
Fish and shellfish retailers said that sales have weakened, causing some mussel sellers to cook their products to prove they were safe to consume.
“Kahit na sabihin namin palaisdaan yung tinitinda naming bangus o tilapia, sadyang ayaw lang nila magtry nang kumain,” said a fish seller.
(Even if we say that the bangus or tilapia that we are selling came from fishponds, they just don’t want to try eating them.)
Cavite has been declared a no-catch zone for fish and shellfish.
The Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources is still waiting for the results of the sample testing from the province.
“There is something like a certain degree to which, if you ingest something, your body cannot take it. There is an issue of food safety; kapag may amoy, talagang may advisory tayo na wag muna siyang kainin (if there is a smell, we really have an advisory not to eat it),” said BFAR officer-in-charge Isidro Velayo Jr.
Affected fishermen are seeking alternative sources of income while the ban is in place.
Meanwhile, BFAR has been distributing relief goods to affected fishermen.
The Cavite provincial government reported that there are 25,000 fishermen in the province.
“Naghahanda na po ang LGU kung paano natin pahahabain ang tulong na ibibigay natin sa kanila. Every week, magbibigay kami ng tulong,” said Noveleta Mayor Dino Chua.
(The LGU is preparing on how to prolong the aid we will give them. Every week, we will give assistance.)
The MT Terranova, which was carrying 1.4 million liters of industrial fuel oil, sank off the coast of Limay, Bataan, on July 25.
Cavite Governor Jonvic Remulla said that an oil slick from the sunken motor tanker has reached several coastal barangays in the province. —Jiselle Anne Casucian/VBL, GMA Integrated News 
