The Philippine Coast Guard (PCG) and the National Bureau of Investigation (NBI) created a joint team to probe the three ships involved in the Bataan oil spill to possible smuggling.
“Tungkol naman po sa relasyon ng tatlong barko kaugnay sa oil o fuel smuggling in Bataan, ang PCG ay nakipag-ugnayan na rin po sa NBI kahapon lamang po at nagbuo na po tayo ng joint investigation team kasama po sila," said PCG Bataan Station commander Lieutenant Commander Michael John Encina on Wednesday.
(Regarding the relationship between the three ships on possible smuggling in Bataan, the PCG has reached out to the NBI and we have already formed a joint investigation team.)
“Ngayon ay kinakonsolidate natin ang mahalagang information, mga datos ng mga barko nito kasama ang kanilang crew na i-interview din natin,” he said.
(Now we are consolidating important information, data and conducting interviews with the crew members.)
The owner of MT Terranova, one of the ships that sank, already denied allegations that the tanker was involved in oil smuggling.
“The owners of MTKr Terranova, categorically deny the allegations of smuggling and involvement in ‘paihi’ operations,” the Porta Vaga Ship Management Group said in a statement.
MTKR Terranova capsized and sank 3.6 nautical miles east off Lamao Point in Limay, Bataan on July 25. One of the crew members died in the incident.
The initial capping bags on the valves of the motor tanker will be replaced with metal caps to avoid a “disastrous oil spill” during the conduct of the siphoning operation.
After the replacement with metal cappings, the siphoning operation may start. Of the 1.4 million liters of industrial fuel oil loaded in MTKR Terranova, 300,000 liters need to be siphoned to float the motor tanker.
On July 26, MTKR Jason Bradley with 5,500 diesel sank in the vicinity waters of Barangay Cabcaben, Mariveles, Bataan.
The PCG and contracted salvor FES Challenger Salvour and Builders continue with their salvage operations for MTKR Jason Bradley, the PCG said on Monday.
Divers were preparing for pipe insertion by clearing debris. Equipment and personnel were on the site and an operational base was being set up.
According to Encina, the siphoning operation for MTKR Jason Bradley is expected to start on Thursday.
On July 31, MV Mirola 1 ran aground in the vicinity waters of Sitio Quiapo, Barangay Biaan, Mariveles, Bataan.
A total of 790 liters of oil-water mixture and five sacks of oil-contaminated debris were collected from grounded MV Mirola 1, the PCG said on Monday.
Based on the initial investigation, Encina said the three ships figured in these accidents due to the bad weather.
The estimated cost of damage due to the oil spill that is affecting the areas of Cavite has reached P1 billion, according to the provincial government on Saturday.
A state of calamity was declared in nine coastal local government units in Cavite due to the oil spill incident from MTKR Terranova, according to the Office of Civil Defense Calabarzon.
“'No catch” and “no sell zone” were imposed in the concerned areas.
In a statement, the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources (BFAR) said it is set to release fuel subsidies and additional food packs to affected fishers.
“As a safety measure, the Bureau advises against consuming fishes caught in areas where oil slicks have been observed,” the BFAR said.
“This is to avoid incidents of food poisoning as a result of ingesting contaminated seafood. DA-BFAR, likewise, urges fisherfolk and the general public to remain calm and monitor the situation through updates issued by government authorities,” it added. --VAL, GMA Integrated News
